
**Deliverables**

 

·         Undertake an Active Travel Audit for pupils travelling to and
from Chepstow and Abergavenny Comprehensive Schools (**including the
Leisure centres**). Sustrans are assessing and auditing all existing and
currently proposed routes - we now have the postcode data sets for both
schools and leisure centres. In both settlements, the leisure centres
are immediately adjoining the schools.

 

·         Identify potential flows to schools and leisure centres,
modelling propensity for use, displaying flows assigned to route
networks based on metrics such as shortest possible path.

 

·         Propose a network of primary and secondary walking and cycling
routes based on propensity considering distance, gradient and high
traffic flows as deterrents to walking and cycling.

 

·         Identify perceived barriers to walking and cycling within the
focus areas. **Sustrans will use our interactive mapping tool as the
primary method for collecting this**

 

·         Validate and agree the proposed network. This will be 2 stage
- initially internally with the local authority (to create a network
they are happy to make public facing, then using interactive digital
mapping, to capture views/agree principles.

 

·         Audit and score the agreed network using the Welsh Government
Walking and Cycling Audit Tool. Sustrans will audit and score the agreed
network using the Welsh Government Walking and Cycling Audit Tools.

 

·         Review and report on the agreed audited network providing a
recommended prioritised delivery plan based on:

·   Impact

·   Cost

·   Deliverability

Impact will relate directly to propensity as demonstrated through the
modelling process. Cost and deliverability will be determined by
Sustrans through considerations such as land ownership and likely
construction cost.

 

·         The final network will be supplied as a GIS data set for
inclusion within Monmouthshire County Council’s GIS system.

The data set will need to consistent with Welsh Government requirements.
Ie, a standardised data set that we/Monmouthshire are able to upload
into Data Map Wales. This is still a Welsh Government work in progress,
so we'll need to monitor it. It's unlikely to be something particularly
onerous though.

 

The **methodology** in the proposal describes:

 

Base line data collated during phase 1 (data collection, including use
of postcode data) will form the base for network analysis with the
objective of identifying a walking and cycling network of primary and
secondary routes.

 

This will consider:

 

**Potential flows to school**

From all links surrounding school, based on:

o    Current (including postcode data provided) We now have these data
sets

o    Feasibly undertaken by Census

 

**Probability of cycle trips**

Estimate the probability of trips being made by bicycle using the
Propensity to Cycle methodology

 

**Walking distance cut off**

The invitation to quote requires identification of “available” walking
routes within a 3 mile radius of each school compliant with the
requirements of the Learner Travel Measure. The emerging revision to the
Active Travel Design Guidance states that “available” routes that do not
meet Active Travel Design Standards, should be considered for inclusion
in the Active Travel Network Map (future INM) for future development.

 

Using the pupil postcode data, primary and secondary corridors of
“available” routes will be identified based on the shortest path.

 

**Assign predicted flows to route network**

Flows and desire lines will be assigned to network using sDNA models.

 

·         **Walking**

Walking will be based on identification of the shortest paths and desire
lines.

 

·         **Cycling**

Cycling routes will prefer short paths but avoid steep gradients and
busy roads where possible.

 

 

**Create draft network plan**

The route network created through this methodology will be reviewed
against the following criteria:

 

·         Identify strategic routes with the highest propensity for
generating new journeys relating to population location and key trip
generators.

·         Only route options which are able to meet Active Travel Design
Guidance requirements.

·         Identify routes that should not be taken forward

·         Identify routes that should be modified, with justification
for any changes

·         Identify new routes that should be added

 

Delivery constraints and potential issues and impacts to the delivery of
a route such as:

·         Parking

·         Road width

·         Allocation of road space

·         Risks around junction capacity

 

Routes will then be prioritised based on impact level and deliverability
and categorised into the following criteria:

 

·         Primary network

·         Secondary network

 

Other routes may be considered as:

 

·         Local neighbourhoods “quietways”

 
